Android blog for release 2.4.0 (#14474)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_posts/2020-09-12-android-240-release.markdown

---
title: "Home Assistant Companion Android App Release 2.4.0"
description: "What's new with the Home Assistant Companion Android App in 2.4.0"
date: 2020-09-12 00:00:00
date_formatted: "September 12, 2020"
comments: true
author: Daniel Shokouhi
categories: Release-Notes
og_image: /images/blog/2020-09-12-android-240-release/Companion.png
---

> Hey there, hope everyone has been enjoying the last release of the Android app. We have another update coming up where we felt its time to give everyone a heads up before release. There are several new changes done that you will immediately notice after installing the update to 2.4.0 so we wanted to cover whats new. You can expect this release to be ready in the next day in the Google Play Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hey there, I hope everyone has been enjoying the last release of the Android app. We have another update coming up where we felt its time to give everyone a heads up before release. There are several new changes done that you will immediately notice after installing the update to 2.4.0, so we wanted to cover what's new. You can expect this release to be available in the Google Play Store tomorrow.
```

## Current and Future Breaking Changes

> Sometimes when we move really fast we may move a bit too fast. While we had fun adding all the new sensors we didn't stop to think about the new user experience and how we are making a burden on them by having non-static attributes for some of the sensors. We wanted to fix this issue but also be curteous to our current users so we have made a few changes. Some of which take place in this release and some in the following release after 2.4.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes when we move really fast, we may move a bit too fast. While we had fun adding all the new sensors, we didn't stop to think about the new user experience and how we are making a burden on them by having non-static attributes for some of the sensors. We wanted to fix this issue and be courteous to our current users, so we have made a few changes. Some of which take place in this release and some in the following release after 2.4.0.
```

> The first major change done that takes place in this release is that the app will no longer send needless updates to your Home Assistant server when there is nothing new to report state-wise. This is the driving change as to why you will see more sensors in the Manage Sensor screen. Some of the attributes attached to some sensors update outside of the state so to combat this change we have split those attributes to become their own sensor. We have opted to keep the existing attributes where they are for this release so they do not break existing automations, they may trigger slower until you move to the new sensor. All of the new sensors are also disabled by default (with the exception of battery) so you will want to enable the ones you care for. The following sensors have had their attributes split up:

Reviewer: This paragraph may be too big?

Also, I think the "why" is missing in all the context here and the paragraph above. Why are we splitting this? What is the benefit?

```suggestion
The first major change in this release is that the app will no longer send needless updates to your Home Assistant server when there is nothing new to report state-wise. This is the driving change as to why you will see more sensors in the Manage Sensor screen. Some of the attributes attached to some sensors update outside of the state, to combat this change, we have split those attributes to become their own sensor. We have opted to keep the existing attributes where they are for this release, so they do not break existing automations. However, they may trigger slower until you move to the new sensor. All of the new sensors are disabled by default (with the exception of battery), so you may want to enable the ones you care for. The following sensors have had their attributes split up:
```

Author: Ok I added some examples and better explanation for the reasoning now, also split up the large parts .

> * Audio Sensor - All attributes. The sensor name for new users has also been changed to `Ringer Mode` to better align with what the state represents.
> * Battery State Sensor - All attributes.
> * Bluetooth Connection - Only `is_bt_on` has been made into its own binary sensor. The other attributes update with the state.
> * Storage Sensor - External storage attributes. The new sensor will behave the same as the current storage sensor which has also now been labeled as Internal Storage.
> * WiFi Connection - All attributes with the exception of `is_hidden`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Audio Sensor - All attributes. The sensor name for new users is changed to `Ringer Mode` to better align with what the state represents.
- Battery State Sensor - All attributes.
- Bluetooth Connection - Only `is_bt_on` now has its own binary sensor. The other attributes update with the state.
- Storage Sensor - External storage attributes. The new sensor will behave the same as the current storage sensor which has also now been labeled as Internal Storage.
- WiFi Connection - All attributes with the exception of `is_hidden`.
```

> These attributes mentioned above will be removed in the next release so please make your switch to the new sensors now to avoid the breaking change then.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These attributes mentioned above will be removed in the next release. Please make your switch to the new sensors now to avoid the breaking change then.
```

> Attributes have also had a slight breaking change as we are now sending the correct data type for the attribute. Previously they were all sent as a string which meant binary values needed to be wrapped in quotes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attributes have also had a slight breaking change as we are now sending the correct data type for the attribute. Previously they were all sent as a string, which meant binary values needed to be wrapped in quotes.
```

The Geocoded location sensor also had its attribute of `Location` split into the attributes they reflect as `latitude` and `longitude`.

## Foreground Service Worker

> We have seen issues where some of the sensors do not update reliably, also there were times where the sensor worker was not able to run. We have gone ahead and converted this to become a foreground service which means from time to time you will see a low priority notification when the sensors are updating. This low priority notification does not make a sound and just appears briefly in the status bar. We felt this to be a good compromise instead of having to use a persistent notification. If you are on Android Oreo or later you do have the ability to minimize or turn off the channel completely. Please keep in mind that doing so the update reliability may not be the same. Google's recommendation was to make it low priority and if you have seen recent updates to the Google Phone and Calendar apps you have already seen this described behavior.

Reviewer: This paragraph may be a bit too long.

```suggestion
We have seen issues where some of the sensors do not update reliably; There were times where the sensor worker was not able to run. We have gone ahead and converted this to become a foreground service, which means from time to time, you will see a low priority notification when the sensors are updating. This low priority notification does not make a sound and appears briefly in the status bar. We felt this to be a good compromise instead of having to use a persistent notification. If you are on Android Oreo or later, you can minimize or turn off the channel completely. Please keep in mind that doing that, may affect the the update reliability. Google's recommendation was to make it low priority and if you have seen recent updates to the Google Phone and Calendar apps you have already seen this described behavior.
```

Author: Split it up to make it easier to read, thanks :)

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2020-09-12-android-240-release/foreground_service.png' alt='Screenshot of Foreground Service'></a>
Screenshot of the Foreground Service.
</p>

## New Sensors

> We have new sensors added this time around. All of the below sensors are disabled by default:
> 
> * Doze mode - Android 6.0+ only, a binary sensor to represent the state of doze mode.
> 
> <p class='img'>
> <img src='/images/blog/2020-09-12-android-240-release/doze_state.png' alt='Screenshot of Doze Mode'></a>
> Screenshot of Doze Mode.
> </p>
> 
> * Interactive - A binary sensor that represents whether or not the device is being interacted with.
> * Power Save mode - A binary sensor that turns on when the device reports its in power saving mode. Most manufacturers allow this to be user configurable on the device.
> * Public IP - A sensor that shows the public IP address of the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have new sensors added this time around. All of the below sensors are disabled by default:

- Doze mode - Android 6.0+ only, a binary sensor to represent the state of doze mode.

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2020-09-12-android-240-release/doze_state.png' alt='Screenshot of Doze Mode'></a>
Screenshot of Doze Mode.
</p>

- Interactive - A binary sensor that represents whether or not the device is being interacted with.
- Power Save mode - A binary sensor that turns on when the device reports it's in power-saving mode. Most manufacturers allow this to be user-configurable on the device.
- Public IP - A sensor that shows the public IP address of the device.
```

## Other Changes

We have also spent time making improvements in other areas of the application:

> * Several more location improvements have been made.
> * Sensors are allowed to be disabled by default so users don't get surprised by a new sensor.
> * Sensors are hidden on devices that do not have them.
> * General improvements to the app architecture to help developers understand the flow.
> * More localization improvements.
> * General improvements to the settings screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Several more location improvements have been made.
- Sensors are allowed to be disabled by default, so users don't get surprised by a new sensor.
- Sensors are hidden on devices that do not have them.
- General improvements to the app architecture to help developers understand the flow.
- More localization improvements.
- General improvements to the settings screen.
```

---
title: "Home Assistant Companion Android App Release 2.4.0"
description: "What's new with the Home Assistant Companion Android App in 2.4.0"
date: 2020-09-12 00:00:00
date_formatted: "September 12, 2020"
comments: true
author: Daniel Shokouhi
categories: Release-Notes
og_image: /images/blog/2020-09-12-android-240-release/Companion.png
---

Hey there, I hope everyone has been enjoying the last release of the Android app. We have another update coming up where we felt its time to give everyone a heads up before release. There are several new changes done that you will immediately notice after installing the update to 2.4.0, so we wanted to cover what's new. You can expect this release to be available in the Google Play Store tomorrow.

## Current and Future Breaking Changes

> Sometimes when we move really fast, we may move a bit too fast. While we had fun adding all the new sensors, we didn't stop to think about the new user experience and how we are making a burden on them by having non-static attributes for some of the sensors. In reality these attributes are a state and we need to treat them as such. If we don't then there will be a need to use templates and that is not user friendly. We wanted to fix this issue and be courteous to our current users, so we have made a few changes. Some of which take place in this release and some in the following release after 2.4.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes when we move really fast, we may move a bit too fast. While we had fun adding all the new sensors, we didn't stop to think about the new user experience and how we are making a burden on them by having non-static attributes for some of the sensors. In reality, these attributes are a state and we need to treat them as such. If we don't, there will be a need to use templates that are not user-friendly. We wanted to fix this issue and be courteous to our current users, so we have made a few changes. Some of which take place in this release and some in the following release after 2.4.0.
```

> The first major change in this release is that the app will no longer send needless updates to your Home Assistant server when there is nothing new to report state-wise. This helps cut down on the amount of data that gets sent out. Some attributes attached to some sensors update outside of the state, to combat this change, we have split those attributes to become their own sensor. For example, the audio sensor had an attribute to tell if headphones were currently plugged into the device. This in itself is a state change and is now a binary sensor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first major change in this release is that the app will no longer send needless updates to your Home Assistant server when there is nothing new to report state-wise. This helps cut down on the amount of data that gets sent out. Some attributes attached to some sensors update outside of the state, to combat this change, we have split those attributes to become their own sensor. For example, the audio sensor had an attribute to tell if headphones were currently plugged into the device. This, by itself, is a state change and thus now a binary sensor.
```

We have opted to keep the existing attributes where they are for this release, this way they do not break existing templates. However, they may trigger slower until you move to the new sensor. All of the new sensors are also disabled by default (with the exception of battery), so you may want to enable the ones you care for. The following sensors have had their attributes split up:

- Audio Sensor - All attributes. The sensor name for new users is changed to `Ringer Mode` to better align with what the state represents.
- Battery State Sensor - All attributes.
- Bluetooth Connection - Only `is_bt_on` now has its own binary sensor. The other attributes update with the state.

> - Storage Sensor - External storage attributes. The new sensor will behave the same as the current storage sensor which has also now been labeled as Internal Storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Storage Sensor - External storage attributes. The new sensor will behave the same as the current storage sensor, which is now labeled as Internal Storage.
```

- WiFi Connection - All attributes with the exception of `is_hidden`.

These attributes mentioned above will be removed in the next release. Please make your switch to the new sensors now to avoid the breaking change then.

Attributes have also had a slight breaking change as we are now sending the correct data type for the attribute. Previously they were all sent as a string, which meant binary values needed to be wrapped in quotes.

The Geocoded location sensor also had its attribute of `Location` split into the attributes they reflect as `latitude` and `longitude`.

## Foreground Service Worker

> We have seen issues where some of the sensors do not update reliably; There were times where the sensor worker was not able to run. We have gone ahead and converted this to become a foreground service, which means from time to time, you will see a low priority notification when the sensors are updating. This low priority notification does not make a sound and just appears briefly in the status bar. We felt this to be a good compromise instead of having to use a persistent notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have seen issues where some of the sensors do not update reliably; There were times when the sensor worker could not run. We have gone ahead and converted this to become a foreground service, which means from time to time, you will see a low priority notification when the sensors are updating. This low priority notification does not make a sound and just appears briefly in the status bar. We felt this to be a good compromise instead of having to use a persistent notification.
```
